Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com
from hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes,
a weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number four 36. In this
episode, Scott talks with Gilbert
creator, Scott Adams about his new
startup calendar tree. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman. This is
another episode of Hansel minutes,
and I am chatting with
Scott Adams. He's the creator of
the Dilbert comic strip, and
now has a new startup
called calendar tree. Thanks for
chatting with me today, sir.
Thanks for having me. So
one of the things about
Dilbert that's so interesting is
how, how it resonates with
reality. And we always kind
of assumed that you were
working in a startup pretty
much for the last 20
years. How did you keep
the voice so authentic? Were
you working with office people
at the time? Well, it's
a combination of things. So
the first, I guess, eight
years of my career, I
actually had a day job.
So I've been pulling from
those memories. Plus a lot
of people email me and
say, could you please embarrass
my boss? He desperately needs
it and I'm always happy
to help. And then more
recently I've always had a
variety of side businesses. I
owned restaurants for awhile. I
started a food company. I've
tried a different variety of
software related things, and now
doing the calendar tree startup
kind of always in the
business world, you know, I'm
still having those same business
meetings and I'm still trying
to set objectives and all
those things that I write
about. And are you the
pointy haired boss? Now I
try to avoid having anything
that looks like management authority
because I'm pretty sure I'm
terrible at it. It's really
easy to make fun of
people, you know, who do
it wrong. But I honestly
think that to be a
really great manager, you've got
to have at least some
minimum level of evil in
you because, because the whole
point of managing right and
leadership in general is getting
people to do something that
they didn't want to do
on their own. So if
it was simply a matter
of informing them, then you
wouldn't need a manager. So
you need somebody to actually
manipulate people to act against
what they believe would have
been their own best interest
you with some convoluted argument
about how this will pay
off in the future. So
there's a little bit of
evil in that that I
can fully embrace. So I
can never really be a
good manager. So it is
manipulation. Good management is excellent
manipulation. Yeah. Manipulation is one
of those words that makes
you think it's automatically bad,
but in fact, we're all
manipulating our environment for good
or bad. That's what we
do as humans. But certainly
if you're a manager, you're
trying to get people to
do things differently than they
were going to do on
their own. And what they
their own was probably what
they thought was good for
them. So really you are
talking them into doing something
that you hope they will
believe is good for them
in the long run, but
really it's good for you
and good for the company,
probably. So when you run
your startup, are you the
benevolent dictator? Like let's all
talk about it. We'll vote
and then I'll decide anything.
No, we don't get that
far. You know, my, my
cofounder when Parker and I,
we, we make decisions together,
but I w I was
quite clear that I wanted
him to be the CEO,
partly because he has those
skills and partly because I'm
terrible at it. So ultimately
he's the decision maker, but
there, we also have equity
holders from Australia, blue Chile
who helped us get started.
They did the, the tech
and they maintained a equity
portion. So we've always got
enough smart people to weigh
in. And so far we're
all pretty data driven people.
So the, the best idea
usually emerges. We haven't had
too much in the way
of disagreements. Hmm. Are you
doing a lot of like
AB testing to make sure
things are correct, or when
you're using the data to
drive the business, what kind
of data you collect? Oh,
I just mean in terms
of a conversation over, should
we do a, or should
we do B we're all
pretty rational people. So we
tend to drive that discussion
toward all right. Has anybody
tried a, how did that
work out? You know, what
are the odds that they
would work compared to the
odds of the B? So
we're just fairly rational people.
And when you're all rational,
things work out well, you
know, the thing I write
about in Dilbert is always
that there's always the crazy
person in the office, right?
You have to inject just
one a-hole into a, into
another wise rational situation and
everything breaks down. What if,
but if you have three
people in the room and
that's usually how many we
have, you know, three or
four, and you're all rational
creatures, we're working toward a
common solution. You really don't
get a lot of disagreements,
as long as you're willing
to look at the facts.
That is the goal. That
is the goal. Unfortunately though,
a-hole driven development or add
somehow seems to it to
happen. So often I have
found sometimes when I I'm
convinced that everyone on my
team is in a hole.
It's usually in fact that
it's Yes. Yeah. I know
that feeling. I usually think
it's me. I go to
that first. Yeah. So what
does calendar tree do? So
Kellen Dimitri was developed as
a solution to a very
specific problem. And the problem
is, and probably every adult
who at least owns a
smartphone has had this problem,
which is you're involved in
some club or organization, or
maybe your kids are in
a club or a team
or an organization, and some
organizer or a coach sends
you a list of all
the, all the games, meetings,
and practices. And you've got
this huge list that had
arrived in email. And now
what are you going to
do with it? Like, do
you have to thumb type
it into your phone? So
you have it on your
calendar, you put it on
the wall, but you're never
in the room where it's
hanging on the wall. So
you've got this problem. So
a calendar DRI does is
let that organizer enter the,
the series of events into
calendar tree, and then send
that out as a link
either by email, or it
could be by, you know,
Facebook posting or Twitter or
LinkedIn, and then anybody, anybody
who gets the link can
click on it. And whether
they have Google calendar or
Apple or outlook, they can
add that entire series of
events to their existing calendar
with just a few keystrokes.
So what we do is
we let you keep your
existing calendar that you're already
happy with. It's already doing
what you want and just
easily add large incoming series
of events that you're interested
in. So that it's not
a second calendar. They are
the events themselves that kind
of come into your calendar.
You're already using. Yeah. Are
unfortunately we probably made a
mistake naming the company because
our name is calendar tree,
but we were thinking more
about the tree part, the
connection part. Then we were
thinking about the calendar. So
we're not a calendar. We're
a way that easily get
large blocks of events stuff
onto your calendar, no matter
what kind you have now,
secondarily, once we've connected to
your calendar, once you've given
us permission to do that
and edit, then when the
organizer has a change to
the schedule, that change will
flow automatically to your calendar
with an email notification that
just says this change happened.
It's it's already on here.
Oh, okay. So I just
recently joined our HOA, which
is both good and bad.
And so I'm the guy
on the HOA. And one
of the things we've been
struggling with is trying to
figure out how we're going
to get everyone to know
when the events are, we've
got, you know, public meetings
and we have to, we
have to there's legal rules
for us to say, we're
having a meeting and everyone
knows where it is. I
could put a year's worth
of the HOA and calendar
tree, and people could subscribe
to that. Yeah, Absolutely. Now,
in that specific example, you
might have trouble getting people
to care about the HOA
meetings. So, so in those
cases, that that might be
a better case where people
do want maybe a separate
calendar or if they need
it, they can go to
it where a calendar tree
really sparkles is if it's
your kid's soccer team and
mom has the schedule, but
dad doesn't, wouldn't it be
great if everybody had it,
including the kid on their
own phone and maybe grandma
wants to see the schedule
to, you know, why can't
I grab my come to
the home games? So when
you're talking about stuff that,
you know, you want every
one of those items on
your calendar, and there's not
one thing on there that
you don't really care about.
That's where we're, we're helpful
HOA. Your real problem is
getting people to care. Right.
And that's, that's the calendars
that your biggest problem. Ah,
that's interesting. So I just
got an email yesterday from
our, my kids community school,
which we all do care
about, and it was a
PDF Oh. Of the year's
events that looked like it
had been. Yeah, exactly. It
was quite, I mean, God
bless them for trying, but
it was rather cobbled together.
And then the best part
you're going to like this
the day after was the
apology for the incorrect PDF.
Apparently all of the dates
have been shifted over by
one a and Friday was
actually a Thursday. So they
had redone the entire PDF
and sent it out to
us. Yeah. Right now, multiply
that by every organization that
you're in every organization that
your family members are in,
because you kind of usually
need to keep track of
that too. And every one
of them is a mess.
Right now, calendar tree is
the only thing that solves
that problem. Okay. Okay. So
then it's, it's, it looks
like it's free. The current
pricing is it's free for
50 calendar connections. So that
would be people that are
connected to that calendar. Yeah.
So if you're a small
organization it's free and once
you get to large organizations
who find it useful, I
mean, if you have more
than 50 people connected to
your calendar, that probably has
real business value to you.
And for a few bucks,
a few bucks a year,
you'd be happy to use
that. So you said that
you'd started a number of
companies before, whether it be
software or you said you
also, some restaurants, is this
just something where writing a,
a cartoon or two a
day is just too challenging
and you have to challenge
yourself even more. I just
assume that when you're a
famous, cartoonist, you write your
cartoon and you go to
the beach. Yeah. A lot
of people think that, well,
here's the complicated answer to
that. Number one, I really
like the beach. I don't
even like vacation. I don't
like the feeling of sitting
around being useless. And, you
know, I was raised by
parents who said, you know,
whatever you do just be
useful, you know, add something
and I'm terribly uncomfortable doing
nothing I can do. I
can do it for a
day. I can do it
for maybe three days, but
you know, vacations don't work
for me. So I'm not
big on free time. Right.
That's the first thing. And
secondly, it's very synergistic, synergistic.
I hate to use that
word since I mock it.
But in order to be
a good cartoonist or a
good writer, you have to
have another part of your
life, which is filling you
with ideas. It's giving you
the, the complexity and the
diversity of thought that you're
not going to get sitting
in a room staring at
your computer. So I need
to get out and mix
it up with the real
world. But beyond that, especially
with calendar tree, sometimes you
see a problem and you
say, alright, nobody's going to
fix that, but I could,
I could fix that problem.
And it's a problem that's
as close to universal as
a problem could be, which
is how do I get
this stuff at my calendar?
So I knew where to
be. It's not going away.
It's not getting less by
itself. Somebody had to fix
it. And so we, we
started by looking around to
see who had already done
it. That was our first
choice. The first choice was
just used someone else's thing,
but it didn't exist. Now.
It turns out it was
really hard. It was hard
to build this thing. It
took two years to get
it right. And a lot
of that had to do
with tweaking the interface until
people could understand this thing,
which wasn't like things they
had used before. How do
you walk them through it
in a way that, you
know, the average mind follows
in the same sequence of,
of learning. So we got
that and we hope we
can solve this fairly large
problem. And we've got a
number of smaller features that
we're looking to add to
this set of solutions that
would be likewise useful in
slightly different. And time-related scheduling
related fields. You had done
some work as a programmer.
You've done all sorts of
different things. But from hearing
you kind of light up
talking about this, it sounds
like you may be a
user experience researcher and looking
at different puzzles, you know,
AB testing and all those
kinds of things. Yeah. I
love that stuff. Cause I
love the, you know, the
connection between the technology and
the, you know, the human
cognitive, you know, amazing things
that you can never stop
learning. It's sort of this,
this infinite wealth of knowledge
that you, you start falling
down and you think, well,
it must be halfway down
now and you're not you've
you haven't even touched it.
I used to, I used
to work in a group
that did interface testing at
the phone company. So I
kind of got immersed in
that world and started to
love it. But more than
that, I'm actually a kind
of a business model nerd.
If you asked me, what's
my favorite thing to think
about and talk about it
would be, how could I
turn something into a business
that had never been a
business before? My background is
not art. I think most
people know that when they
look at my comic, my
background is economics. I have
a degree in economics. I
have an MBA from Berkeley.
So of my, you know,
core talent is around business
and how to make something
work. And in fact, it's,
it's probably at least half
of the reason that Dilbert
broke out from a crowded
field of comics that were
in many cases, better than
mine, but I had enough
business experience that I could
make things happen that weren't
happening for other people. Well,
and speaking of economics and
business, you wrote a book,
not a cartoon compilation book,
but a book more about
business and your experience in
business called how to fail
at almost everything and still
win big. Did you pull
from those aspects of it?
Yeah. That book was a
sort of a public service
sort of thing. Obviously I
want it to be commercially
successful because it gets it
to the most people and
creates the most good. But
the idea was, you know,
I've learned a number of
things because I've been involved
in so many different types
of businesses, everything from art
to technology to, you know,
serious business stuff. And I
thought I wanted to see
if I could capture that.
Now what's unique about my
situation is that probably my
one world-class skill. If I
could say that is that
I'm pretty good at simplifying
things. And that comes from
probably a little bit of
upbringing, but a lot of
practice being a cartoonist and
taking complicated things and putting
it into three sentences every
day. So I thought, well,
when I was 20, I
really didn't have a mentor.
I didn't have anybody who
could give me the basic
model of success. You know,
what's the basic idea. I
know I'm going to tailor
it myself. So my book,
doesn't try to tell people
do it this way. What
I say instead is there
are a lot of people
doing a lot of different
things. Some of them are
working. They're not all going
to be the thing that
works for you, but here's
what I did. And try
to explain it as clearly
as possible. So there's somebody
reading the book and say,
okay, I may not want
to use all of this,
but let me compare it
to what I'm doing. Now,
let me compare it to
what other people are telling
me, which one makes more
sense. And by the way,
if I can test one
against the other, you know,
do it this way for
awhile, how's it work? Do
it this way for awhile.
Why not? So it's a
little bit of a, here's
more stuff to think about.
Here's more stuff to test.
It looks like it worked
for me, but you have
to acknowledge that luck is
a giant factor in all
of this stuff. And I
addressed that fairly directly by
talking about the obvious, which
is, if you do 10
things, you've created a situation
where lucky can find you
a little more readily than
if you did one thing
and out Conversations with people
at startup conferences and you
know, places where people are
doing a side gig or
some kind of moonlighting. And
they always seem to have
one idea that they're doing
on the side that they're
throwing their entire life into.
And I've always said like,
I see what you're doing
here, but you're going to
be crushed when that doesn't
work out. So I always
try to have three or
four little ideas that are
going to create passive income
that are going to be,
you know, if one of
them falls apart, it's not
going to be a huge
deal. Like if you were
going to start a consulting
company, you would not want
to have one client, right?
You want to mix it
up, Right? You want diversity
in all things. I mean,
there's there aren't too many
situations where diversity, isn't a
good thing. You know, diversifying
your, your portfolio of whatever
and adding on to what
you just said. History has
shown that there's literally no
one smart enough to predict
what's going to work. All
right. That person hasn't been
born yet, who can look
at an idea and in
its infancy and say, yeah,
that thing is going to
go from a good idea
to a working business model,
to no real competition, to
a monopoly someday. Nobody can
do that. What people can
do to say, okay, you
didn't do anything so stupid
is going to kill you.
All right. It looks good
so far. And then you
did three of them. So
that's smarter. You've increased your
odds. The other thing I
learned and I wrote about
this in the book, you
mentioned a, had a fail
at almost everything and still
win big is that often
you can identify something that's
going to go big by
as X factor. But that
thing that you can't, you
can't really build it in.
Like you can't say, I
want to build some X
factor into this thing. It's
something you, you see after
the fact a little bit,
you know, once it's already
kind of on its way,
but you can detect that
early by how much excitement,
a small number of people
have worked as, as opposed
to a large group of
people all say, that's pretty
good. Then you have nothing.
All right, because I've seen
that over and over again.
If a lot of people
say, yeah, that's a good
idea. And that's pretty good.
You got enough. But if
90% of the people say,
and this applied to Dilbert
and the first few years,
90% of the people say,
that's really awful. That's poorly
drawn, poorly written. It doesn't
apply to me whatsoever. But
here's the important part, 10%
look at that. And they
say, I'm going to have
to cut this out. I'm
going to form my own
book of Dilbert comics based
on the scripts I've selected.
I liked them so much.
I'm going to send them
to my friends. I'm going
to write to the author.
This really, this works for
me. This is touching something.
Then you have something that
you probably can't stop unless
you do something stupid. All
right. So that is going
to grow. So that's what
I look for. I look
for the, you throw it
out there and you see
anybody get excited. See, while
you were saying that, I
just got a little tear
in my eye. Cause I
was thinking about the TV
show Firefly, which is exactly
what you just said. Like,
you know, 10% of us
are like, we worship at
the, at the alter of
Firefly and everyone was like,
I think it's not really
that interesting, but they still
canceled, But they made a
movie. They did make a
movie, which I wanted, which
I watched and enjoyed it
a lot. Very, very much.
Yeah. That in a way,
I guess that might be
one of the exceptions because
that's certainly had, well, you
know, the original star Trek
got poor ratings go yet,
but add the X factor
so much. So that was
formed Trekkies. Yeah. I actually,
I just picked up a
copy of the DVD, special
edition of the search for
Spock over at a garage
sale for $2 a by
someone who did not appreciate
it, Changing And gears a
little bit. I noticed that
you, you had an issue
with your hands and I've
written up extensively on the
programmers hands and I've had
surgery on my right hand
for trigger finger and a
number of tendon issues where
I've been unable to work
because of my hand, what
did happen to your hand?
So what happened was that
when I drew my pinky
finger would involuntarily spasm and
we thought at first it
was just some damage in
the hand, you know, some
kind of carpal tunnel, but
by weird coincidence, the expert
world expert, probably in this
condition that I had lived
in my town and he
was part of the Kaiser
HMO that I used. So
I got referred to him
and he identified it as
a focal dystonia, which is
actually based in the brain.
And one of the ways
you can confirm this is
that when I drew lefthanded,
which I could do a
little bit on mildly ambidextrous,
when as soon as my
left hand hit the page,
my right hand, pinky would
spasm with no, no pattern.
So that's how, that's how,
you know, it's it's brain
and not hand. So when
I, I went to him
and I said, you know,
here's my problem. He diagnosed
me. And I said, what's,
what's the fix? What's the
cure. So surgery I'll get
it. You know, I have
to have this cause I
gotta gotta be able to
draw. And he said, there
isn't a, the fix is
you change careers. And, but
if you'd like, you can
be part of a group
of people who are trying
different things. And if one
of them works, you know,
a little bit of AB
testing, I guess if one
of them works, you'll have
something, would you like to
be part of that? So
I said, yes. So I
tried biofeedback. I tried, you
know, the manipulations of the
hands and various practices and
stuff, and I wasn't getting
any real results. But then
I tried this, I noticed
that when I touched my,
my pen to paper, it
would be just a little
delay before the pinky would
spasm. So during my business
meetings, I was still working
my day job then meeting
in below the table where
nobody could watch, I would
just do this. I'll just
tap my pen to paper
and then remove it before
the spousal. Now I reasoned
that if this was a
brain problem, it could be
reprogrammable. And so eventually I
got that. I can hold
there for a second and
before it would spasm. And
once I got that up
to like five seconds, it
just reprogrammed and went away.
And I believe I was
told I'm in the literature
under not with my own
name as the first case
of a reversal. Now the
trick with that is that
if I continue drawing on
paper with the same regularity
and amount of work, it
would come back and I
felt this start to come
back a little bit. But
I moved when it started
to come back. The last
time I felt a little
twinge of it. I moved
to the Wacom, which is
what I use now. So
I draw directly on the
computer screen. I reasoned that
if my brain is the,
is where this is starting,
that even though I'm using
the same motion with a
stylist that is just like
a pen, that it would
feel different enough that it
wouldn't activate it because it
was just a slightly sort
of a cousin to the
routine. It wasn't close enough.
And that's exactly what happened.
So I can, I can
draw all day on the
computer and it doesn't activate
the pinky. If I write
more than 10 checks in
a row, the pinky starts
to get a little tweak.
That's amazing. I said, I've
been typing for so many
years. I've been typing basically,
you know, full time as
a job, 25 years. I
cannot write, I cannot stand
to write like signing checks
and writing. It's just hands
up. Yeah. I, I, I
have that problem. Plus the
mental thing, which is, if
you don't right, you kind
of forget how so, you
know, all right. I'll be
writing something and I'll think,
I don't think that's even
a letter. I don't even
know what that is. I
was trying to teach my
six year old cursive because
he thinks it's a foreign
language and I've completely lost
cursive. Like, I don't even
know what a cursive are.
It looks like it's just
a line on the way
to another letter. And he's
like, he actually questioned my
ability at curse at my
six year old. Is this
really a thing? Are you
sure? This is how people,
right? Yeah. Yeah. Maybe it
should be teaching him HTML
five or something instead. I
don't know, Frankly. I really,
I really need to. It's
a problem. So in, in
your day, how much time
do you spend drawing? How
much time do you spend
at calendar tree? And is
this like a startup startup
where you have an office
or do you just hang
out at your kitchen table?
So right now we're, we're
dispersed. We've got some folks
in Australia, my founder and
I are in the same
town and we have a
CTO now and he's, he's
a driving distance away. So
we meet at my house
in my garage, which I
have elephant it as a
proper garage office, very jobs,
very jobs, yen. I thought
the vibe of it being
in being in an actual
garage, but somehow help. And
it's amazing, you know, it
does. There's something about the,
you know, stick to business
nature of a garage that
that does feel right. I,
I actually do feel more
productive out there. Yeah, it
is. It's funny. I put
a, what do you call
it? A treadmill desk together
in the garage. And when
I opened the big double
doors and I'm on the
treadmill desk and I'm deleting
email like a champ, cause
that's my job. It just
has a feeling of like,
I'm going places as I
am not going anywhere. I'm
sitting here doing my little
treadmill and deleting email. I
feel like, you know, I'm
in my garage and I'm
getting things done and taking
care of business. It is
somehow more satisfying than a
big mahogany home Home office.
And you know, if I
may say something that reminded
me of, you've probably seen
some research that says, if
you're in a cafe with
cafe background noise, you're actually
more creative than if it
had been silent. Likewise, if
you take a shower you're
more creative than if you
take a walk you're more
creative and all these things
have been pretty well demonstrated.
Now, a walk and a
shower and a cafe have
nothing in common except a
certain type of distraction that
you can compartmentalize. Like you
can walk while forgetting, you're
walking your shower wall, forgetting
your showering cafe. You, you
block out the background noises
after wall. So there's something
about a creative distraction that
somehow helps the, the generation
of new ideas. Interesting. So,
so I think you're going
to find your treadmill desk
is giving you more than
exercise. I like that. I'm
wonder if it's blocking out
all of the crushing self
doubt. No, you, you need
that. No lose that. That's
the only thing that gets
us up. Have you ever
found yourself in your office?
Not in a cafe, not
walking, not in the shower
saying I have to get
a strip out today and
if I don't, I'm going
to die and I have
nothing. Yeah. So, yes. And
when I started this, I
was doing my day job
where I'd have to leave
from the office at like
six 30 in the morning.
So from four to four
30 in the morning, until
then I had to do
my work and I had
to do one every day
or else there would be
a blank spot in the
newspaper. So what I discovered
was this was the great
freeing discovery of my life
and probably the most, probably
the single most useful thing
that I ever learned, which
is that sometimes I'd have
this great idea and I'd
have the whole hour and
a half to develop it.
And sometimes I'd have only
10 minutes left and nothing,
but I'd say, okay, just
do something bad. Just do
you know, you don't have
the option of nothing. So
if all you can think
of is the bad idea,
do that bad idea what
happened was, and the great
realization is that the readers
would judge the bad version
as highly as the good
version sometimes better. In fact,
there was no correlation between
what I thought was a
home run and what the
audience loved was a good
comic that I just couldn't
judge. And I'd seen a
hint of that when I
first tried to submit my
comics for a publication, when
I tried to become a
syndicated cartoonist, I put together
50 sample Dilbert comics. I
called all my friends over
and I said individually, so
they wouldn't be influenced by
each other, sort, these into
the good ones and the
bad ones. So I only
send out my good ones.
And number of friends did
that and there was no
correlation. It was, there was
no way I could pick
the better ones that were
more likely to be picked,
just no correlation. So I
sat them all in and
don't get picked up. But
one thing you learn is
that you're just not good
at judging what other people
are gonna like. You, you
have to kind of put
something out there, conform to
some rules of, you know,
it has to be this
type of thing for the
space beyond that. You're just
guessing. Very cool. Well, folks
can check out the first
50 Dilbert comics at dilbert.com/first_fifty.
I'll put a link to
that in the show notes
and go up to calender
tree.com and you can click
on, get started now and
sign up free trial, a
50 calendar connections. Very, very
cool. Thank you so much.
Scott Adams for chatting with me
today. Thank you for having
me. This is fun. This
has been another episode of
Hanselminutes and we'll see you
again next week.